# What is BayesiaLab?

### What is BayesiaLab?

* BayesiaLab is a universal analytics platform that provides scientists with a comprehensive “lab” environment for machine learning, knowledge modeling, diagnosis, analysis, simulation, and optimization - all based on the Bayesian network formalism.

BayesiaLab supports a range of operating systems:

* Windows XP, Vista, 7, 8, 10, 11 (32-bit and 64-systems)
* macOS/OS X: Mountain Lion (10.8) or later (Intel and ARM)
* Linux/Unix

{% hint style="info" %}
BayesiaLab always has to be installed on your local hardware. BayesiaLab is not available as a remotely-hosted Software-as-a-Service (SaaS).
{% endhint %}

### Value Proposition

* With BayesiaLab, Bayesian networks have become a powerful and practical paradigm for gaining a deep understanding of high-dimensional domains.
* BayesiaLab leverages the inherently graphical structure of Bayesian networks for exploring and explaining complex problems.

### Use Cases

* BayesiaLab is employed for all kinds of research and analytics tasks.
* Use cases include:
  * Bioinformatics
  * Biostatistics
  * Causal Reasoning/Inference
  * Data Mining
  * Demographic Analysis
  * Decision Analysis
  * Economics/Econometrics
  * Engineering
  * Epidemiology
  * Evidential Reasoning
  * Financial Analysis
  * Forensic Analysis
  * Impact Analysis
  * Knowledge Discovery
  * Knowledge Modeling
  * Machine Learning
  * Market Research/Marketing Science
  * Medical Research
  * Microarray Analysis
  * Operations Research
  * Pharmaceutical Research
  * Quality Analysis/Control
  * Reasoning under Uncertainty
  * Reliability Analysis
  * Risk Analysis
  * Root Cause Analysis
  * Sports Analytics
  * Strategic Decision Support

### Alternative to Statistical Software?

* We see BayesiaLab as a complementary tool with regard to more traditional, parametric statistical methods.
* BayesiaLab really shows its strength when it comes to complex, high-dimensional problem domains and reasoning under uncertainty.

### Learning Curve

* After completing the [Introductory BayesiaLab Course](../academy-courses-events-seminars-and-webinars/), it typically takes six months to one year of practical use to become proficient in using the software platform.
* Embracing BayesiaLab as a research framework requires a significant commitment in terms of time and resources.

### Big Data

* BayesiaLab's data capacity is only limited by the RAM of the computer on which it is installed.
* All of BayesiaLab's algorithms are performed in memory.
* Furthermore, BayesiaLab offers database connectivity via JDBC.

### Cloud Deployment

* BayesiaLab Professional is not available as SaaS.
* However, BayesiaLab can be installed on your own virtual machine, e.g., on an Amazon EC2 server.
* For setups with multi-user access, the respective license fees apply.

### Data Security

{% hint style="info" %}
* BayesiaLab and the Bayesia APIs always run locally on the hardware on which you installed the software, e.g., your desktop or laptop computer.
* There is no provision for running BayesiaLab remotely on Bayesia's servers.&#x20;
* Your local BayesiaLab installation never transmits any of your data or models to the Global Bayesia License Server.
* The only information sent to the Global Bayesia License Server is the user login and hashed password, the user account, and the version of BayesiaLab software currently in use.
* For each session, only the username, account, start and end date/time of the session, plus the associated IP address, are stored on the Global Bayesia License Server.
* Any temporary connection ("ping") to the Global BayesiaLab License Server only serves the purpose of validating your licenses.
* All data and models are stored within the infrastructure you control unless you explicitly choose to upload them elsewhere, for instance, to the BayesiaLab WebSimulator Server, with the express intent of sharing your model​.
* Bayesia staff has no access to or visibility of your models or data through the BayesiaLab software.&#x20;
{% endhint %}

### Programmatic Access

* You can access many of BayesiaLab’s functions outside the graphical user interface by using the [Bayesia Engine APIs](../bayesia-engine-api/).
* They allow developers to integrate BayesiaLab’s technology into their own applications.
* The APIs are available as:
  * Java API
  * REST API

### Exporting Models

* Models with a Target Node, i.e., those generated by supervised learning algorithms, can be exported as code for
  * SAS
  * PHP
  * JavaScript
  * VBA
  * Python
  * R.
* This [Code Export Module](../prices-and-licensing/bayesialab-code-export-module-pricing.md) is available as an add-on module to BayesiaLab by subscription.

### Licensing Options

* License Rental (3 months, 6 months, 12 months)
* License Purchase (perpetual) plus annual maintenance
* Elastic Licensing

### Pricing

* Please see our [pricing pages](../prices-and-licensing/) for details on license configurations and pricing.
* A fully-featured [Academic Edition](../prices-and-licensing/bayesialab-professional-licensing-options-and-pricing/bayesialab-academic-edition.md) is available at a substantial discount.
* Additionally, we offer a BayesiaLab [Education Package](../prices-and-licensing/bayesialab-professional-licensing-options-and-pricing/bayesialab-education-package.md), which provides an economical way of using BayesiaLab for classroom instruction.
